# re6st

[Nexedi](https://www.nexedi.com/) is a French open-source software company primarily known for their Enterprise Resource Planning system [ERP5](https://www.erp5.com/). However, they also have some very cool side projects, including [a fork of ChromeOS](https://www.nayuos.com/) and the topic of this post, [re6st](https://www.erp5.com/NXD-re6st.Two.Page).

Re6st is an IPv6-based overlay network system, like cjdns, but while cjdns is monolithic, re6st delegates most of the hard work to dependencies, like using OpenVPN for tunnels and [babeld](https://github.com/jech/babeld) for routing. It also uses clearnet IPv6 addresses, assigned by a "registry" (of which there is one for every network). It looks like Nexedi designed it for the purpose of balancing traffic over multiple links and VPN-ing across multiple clouds for their enterprise-y customers.

Right now Nexedi operates a public registry, which hands out routeable Internet IPv6 prefixes and handles clearnet traffic (albeit at ~300 ms latency, via France). If your network configuration isn't amenable to something like Hurricane Electric, re6st might work for you.

This post is a guide to getting started with re6st on Ubuntu 16.04, because that's what I just did and I had to solve some nontrivial problems. I'm basing most of it off of [this guide on the site of yet another Nedexi project](http://www.wendelin.io/documentation/developer/howto/wendelin-HowTo/developer-Howto.Install.re6st/developer-Howto.Install.re6st).

    # Get the deb signing key
    gpg --recv-keys 1A716324
    # Make sure we are logged in for sudo
    sudo true
    # Trust the key
    gpg --export 1A716324 | sudo apt-key add -
    # Add the repo
    echo "deb http://git.erp5.org/dist/deb ./" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/re6st.list
    # Download package lists
    sudo apt-get update
    # Downgrade/patch babled
    sudo apt-get install babeld=1.6.2-nxd1
    # Install re6st itself
    sudo apt-get install re6stnet
    # Register with the public registry and create a config
    # You can redo this with your e-mail to get a certificate with your e-mail in it for ???
    # Instead of the results of `hostname` you can put a literal identifying name instead.
    sudo re6st-conf -d /etc/re6stnet --registry "http://re6stnet.nexedi.com" -r title `hostname` --anonymous
    # If you want to use re6st as your IPv6 default route:
    # Make sure you don't have another one with "ip -6 route" or re6st will be upset!
    echo "default" | sudo tee -a /etc/re6stnet/re6stnet.conf
    # Now start it up!
    sudo /etc/init.d/re6stnet restart

Interestingly, while re6st opens up a few TUN interfaces with OpenVPN, it puts your re6st IPv6 address on **the loopback interface, lo0**. So if you want to find it, look there. It should be under 2001:67c:1254::/48.

Logs go to /var/log/re6stnet/re6stnet.log, and can be made more verbose by uncommenting things in the config file.

If you want to see if it's working, do an "ip -6 route". It puts other subnets in the main kernel routing table, so you should be able to see lots of other online people in there. You can traceroute6 to them to try and figure out how the system routes things.

If you want to run a registry, you also get a "re6st-registry" tool that I don't know how to use.

If you want to start up re6st under a terminal, so you can see why it doesn't work, stop the service and then go into `/etc/re6stnet` and do `sudo re6stnet @/etc/re6stnet/re6stnet.conf`, which will load up the config file and log to console.

An interesting mad computer science project would be to marry cjdns IPtunnel to re6st and route between them.

## Update: adding default routes when re6st doesn't want them

If you already have a default IPv6 route, and you try to start up re6st with `default` in the config file or the `--default` option, it will complain and refuse to start:

```
Detected default route (default via fe80::6a1c:a2ff:fe16:b50 dev wlp3s0  proto static  metric 600  pref medium) whereas you specified --default. Fix your configuration.
```

I ran into this when using re6st alongside my cjdns meshnet WiFi network (to be discussed in a forthcoming post). Basically, my re6st machine is on my home network, and also on a WiFi network where another machine advertises a default IPv6 route and proxies traffic to cjdns. I can't set that machine to only advertise `fc00::/8` where cjdns actually lives, because [Linux only accepts default route advertisements](http://serverfault.com/a/437768) without special configuration. I don't want to turn off router advertisements altogether on my machine, either. What I need is for re6st to be my default route and take priority over the route that the other machine is advertising (because its route really only provides cjdns access).

Looking at the default route that re6st adds with `ip -6 route show`, it looks something like this:

```
default via fe80::8494:31ff:fe7b:c2bb dev re6stnet7  proto babel  src 2001:67c:1254:c:e5::1  metric 1024  pref medium
```

That's just setting the default route to some other re6st peer. When `default` is off, we instead get a route like this:

```
default from 2001:67c:1254::/48 via fe80::8494:31ff:fe7b:c2bb dev re6stnet3  proto babel  metric 1024  pref medium
```

That's basically the same thing, but qualified so that it only applies to packets from re6st addresses. What we want to do is find this qualified route, un-qualify it, and add it back as a default route that will override whatever default route gets picked up from router advertisements:

```
ROUTE_ARGS=$(ip -6 route show | grep via | grep from | grep re6stnet | grep babel | head -n1 | sed 's/from [^ ]* //g' | sed 's/proto babel/proto static/' | sed 's/metric 1024/metric 100/')
sudo ip -6 route add ${ROUTE_ARGS}
```

That ends up running something like `sudo ip -6 route add default via fe80::8494:31ff:fe7b:c2bb dev re6stnet3  proto static  metric 100  pref medium`, and telling your IPv6 packets to take this static route with a lower metric instead of whatever route you got via advertisements. Whatever peer was being used to route packets sent explicitly from your re6st address will now be used for all default-route IPv6 out of the system.

Test it:

```
$ tracert6 ipv6.google.com
traceroute to ipv6.l.google.com (2607:f8b0:4005:804::200e) from 2001:67c:1254:c:e5::1, 30 hops max, 60 bytes packets
 1  2001:67c:1254:38::1 (2001:67c:1254:38::1)  100.821 ms  99.291 ms  213.204 ms 
 2  2001:67c:1254:a6::1 (2001:67c:1254:a6::1)  238.866 ms  350.385 ms  152.892 ms 
 3  2001:67c:1254::1 (2001:67c:1254::1)  328.821 ms  388.194 ms  200.653 ms 
 4  2a02:2178:2:d::1 (2a02:2178:2:d::1)  390.276 ms  311.388 ms  202.418 ms 
 5  frpar02-a9k1.rt.ielo.net (2a02:2178:0:27::1)  381.508 ms  310.507 ms  201.367 ms 
 6  ix-ae-10-0.tcore1.PYE-Paris.ipv6.as6453.net (2a01:3e0:fff0:400::3d)  334.336 ms  311.488 ms  196.503 ms 
 7  2001:4860:1:1:0:1935:0:6c (2001:4860:1:1:0:1935:0:6c)  338.156 ms  321.424 ms  199.804 ms 
 8  2001:4860::1:0:4a3a (2001:4860::1:0:4a3a)  327.197 ms  324.775 ms  212.458 ms 
 9  2001:4860::8:0:5e19 (2001:4860::8:0:5e19)  324.017 ms  317.629 ms  200.803 ms 
10  2001:4860::8:0:bafa (2001:4860::8:0:bafa)  452.611 ms  450.136 ms  336.136 ms 
11  2001:4860::8:0:9150 (2001:4860::8:0:9150)  471.817 ms  443.820 ms  445.882 ms 
12  2001:4860::8:0:b0e2 (2001:4860::8:0:b0e2)  468.634 ms  468.902 ms  469.171 ms 
13  2001:4860::8:0:79e5 (2001:4860::8:0:79e5)  446.518 ms  426.434 ms  418.951 ms 
14  2001:4860::8:0:6117 (2001:4860::8:0:6117)  469.911 ms  482.153 ms  410.429 ms 
15  2001:4860::1:0:c1af (2001:4860::1:0:c1af)  481.630 ms  461.292 ms  347.315 ms 
16  2001:4860:0:1006::1 (2001:4860:0:1006::1)  460.874 ms  460.999 ms  400.563 ms 
17  2001:4860:0:1::1c9f (2001:4860:0:1::1c9f)  485.188 ms  420.896 ms  388.809 ms 
18  sfo07s13-in-x0e.1e100.net (2607:f8b0:4005:804::200e)  420.663 ms  388.755 ms  349.057 ms
```

Note `ix-ae-10-0.tcore1.PYE-Paris.ipv6.as6453.net` in there. I'm not in Paris, but Nexedi is.

Now, if the peer you added as a default route goes away, your packets aren't going to be going anywhere. If that happens, delete the route with `sudo ip -6 route del default proto static metric 100` and then repeat the add process to get whatever new peer re6st has found as the best route to the Internet.

